# Testing with Truffle

Folder architecture:
```
├── build
  ├── contracts
      ├── Migrations.json
      ├── CryptoZombies.json
      ├── erc721.json
      ├── ownable.json
      ├── safemath.json
      ├── zombieattack.json
      ├── zombiefactory.json
      ├── zombiefeeding.json
      ├── zombiehelper.json
      ├── zombieownership.json
├── contracts
  ├── Migrations.sol
  ├── CryptoZombies.sol
  ├── erc721.sol
  ├── ownable.sol
  ├── safemath.sol
  ├── zombieattack.sol
  ├── zombiefactory.sol
  ├── zombiefeeding.sol
  ├── zombiehelper.sol
  ├── zombieownership.sol
├── migrations
└── test
. package-lock.json
. truffle-config.js
. truffle.js
```

Truffle provides support for tests written in JavaScript and Solidity.

## Chapter 2: Getting Set Up

1. Every time you start writing a new test suite, first load the build artifacts of the contract you want to interact with. This way, Truffle will know how to format our function calls in a way the contract will understand.
Example with a contract named `CryptoZombies`: `const CryptoZombies = artifacts.require("CryptoZombies");`
This returns a **contract abstraction** which hides the complexity of interacting with Ethereum and provides a convenient javaScript interface to Solidity smart contracts.

### The `contract()` function
Truffle adds a thin wrapper around [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/) in order to make testing simpler. 
- **group tests** by calling a function named `contract()`. It extends Mocha's `describe()` by providing a list of accounts for testing and doing some cleanup as well.
  - `contract()` takes two arguments. The first one, a string, must indicate what we’re going to test. The second parameter, a callback, is where we’re going to actually write our tests.
- **execute them**: the way we’ll be doing this is by calling a function named `it()` which also takes two arguments: a string that describes what the test actually does and a callback.

Example:
```
 contract("MyAwesomeContract", (accounts) => {
   it("should be able to receive Ethers", () => {
   })
 })
```

## Chapter 3, 4, 5 : First test - creating a new zombie
[Ganache](https://truffleframework.com/ganache) sets up a local Ethereum network.
Since Ganache and Truffle are tightly integrated we can access these accounts through the accounts array .

In the `it()` function, the second parameter is the callback function which is asynchronous (`async` keyword).

**Test Set Up**
 In order to actually interact with our smart contract, we have to create a JavaScript object that will act as an instance of the contract. 
 Ex: `const contractInstance = await CryptoZombies.new();`

**Act**
One of the features of Truffle is that it wraps the original Solidity implementation and lets us specify the address that makes the function call by passing that address as an argument.
This is useful to check ownership.

*Log and events*
Once we specified the contract we wanted to test using `artifacts.require`, Truffle automatically provides the logs generated by our smart contract. 
Let's say `result` is the return of a function called. it will then contain the logs (`result.logs[0].`)
- `result.tx`: transaction hash
- `result.receipt`: object containing the transaction receipt.

Note that logs can also be used as a much cheaper option to store data. The downside is that they can't be accessed from within the smart contract itself.

**Assert**
There are built-in assertion modules coming with functions such as `equal()` or `deepEqual()`.

## Chapter 6, 7: Hooks

One of Mocha's (and Truffle's) features is the ability to have some snippets of code called hooks run before or after a test. To run something before a test gets executed, the code should be put inside a function named `beforeEach()`.
```
beforeEach(async () => {
  // let's put here the code that creates a new contract instance
});
```

When making sure that some behavior are not possible and that you encounter an error, use `try/catch` blocks.
example: 
```
try {
    //try to create the second zombie
    await contractInstance.createRandomZombie(zombieNames[1], {from: alice});
    assert(true);
  }
  catch (err) {
    return;
  }
assert(false, "The contract did not throw.");
```

## Chapter 8: Zombie Transfers (2 ways with ERC721) - groups of tests

ERC721 specification has 2 different ways to transfer tokens:
- Alice calls `transferFrom` with her address as the `_from` parameter, Bob’s address as the `_to` parameter, and the `zombieId` she wants to transfer.
- Alice first calls `approve` Bob’s address and the `zombieId`. The contract then stores that Bob is approved to take the zombie. Next, when Alice or Bob calls `transferFrom`, the contract checks if that `msg.sender` is equal to Alice’s or Bob’s address. If so, it transfers the zombie to Bob.

To group tests, Truffle provides a function called `context`.
```
context("with the single-step transfer scenario", async () => {
    it("should transfer a zombie", async () => {
      // TODO: Test the single-step transfer scenario.
    })
})

context("with the two-step transfer scenario", async () => {
    it("should approve and then transfer a zombie when the approved address calls transferFrom", async () => {
      // TODO: Test the two-step scenario.  The approved address calls transferFrom
    })
    it("should approve and then transfer a zombie when the owner calls transferFrom", async () => {
        // TODO: Test the two-step scenario.  The owner calls transferFrom
     })
})
```

*note*: 
If we place an `x` in front of the `context()` functions as follows: `xcontext()`, Truffle will skip those tests.
`x` can be placed in front of an `it()` function as well. 

## Chapter 12: Manipulate time

Ganache provides a way to move forward in time through two helper functions:
- **evm_increaseTime**: increases the time for the next block
- **evm_mine**: mines a new block.

- Every time a new block gets mined, the miner adds a timestamp to it. Let's say the transactions that created our zombies got mined in block 5.
- Next, we call `evm_increaseTime` but, since the blockchain is immutable, there is no way of modifying an existing block. So, when the contract checks the time, it will not be increased.
- If we run `evm_mine`, block number 6 gets mined (and timestamped) which means that, when we put the zombies to fight, the smart contract will "see" that a day has passed.

example:
```
await web3.currentProvider.sendAsync({
  jsonrpc: "2.0",
  method: "evm_increaseTime",
  params: [86400],  // there are 86400 seconds in a day
  id: new Date().getTime()
}, () => { });

web3.currentProvider.send({
    jsonrpc: '2.0',
    method: 'evm_mine',
    params: [],
    id: new Date().getTime()
});
```
This can be useful. For example in our case, zombies are allowed to attack only once a day, making unit tests to fail.
Note: Obviously, time traveling is not available on the main net or on any of the available test chains that are secured by miners. 

## Chapter 13: More expressive assertions with Chai
The built-in `assert` module is not bad, but has a major drawback- the code doesn't read well. Fortunately, there are several better assertion modules out there, and `Chai` is one of the best.

### Chai assertion library
Here are the [guides](https://www.chaijs.com/guide/) of Chai. `npm install chai -g`.

Here are 3 kinds of assertions:
1. `expect`: lets you chain natural language assertions as follows
  ```
  let lessonTitle = "Testing Smart Contracts with Truffle";
  expect(lessonTitle).to.be.a("string");
  ```
2. `should`: allows for similar assertions as expect interface, but the chain starts with a should property
  ```
  let lessonTitle = "Testing Smart Contracts with Truffle";
  lessonTitle.should.be.a("string");
  ```
3. `assert`: provides a notation similar to that packaged with node.js and includes several additional tests and it's browser compatible
  ```
  let lessonTitle = "Testing Smart Contracts with Truffle";
  assert.typeOf(lessonTitle, "string");
  ```

Those kinds of assertion must first be imported in the project. e.g. `var expect = require('chai').expect;`.

## Chapter 14: Testing against Loom

To test against Loom, we first need to configure truffle so that it knows how to deploy to Loom testnet:
```
loom_testnet: {
      provider: function() {
        const privateKey = 'YOUR_PRIVATE_KEY';
        const chainId = 'extdev-plasma-us1';
        const writeUrl = 'wss://extdev-basechain-us1.dappchains.com/websocket';
        const readUrl = 'wss://extdev-basechain-us1.dappchains.com/queryws';
        return new LoomTruffleProvider(chainId, writeUrl, readUrl, privateKey);
      },
      network_id: 'extdev'
    }
```

Warning: remember never to reveal the private key. it should be in a separate file that is not pushed in the repo.

**The accounts array**
In order to make Truffle talk to Loom, the default `HDWalletProvider` has been replaced with the [loom-truffle-provider](https://github.com/loomnetwork/loom-truffle-provider).
We have to tell our provider to fill in the accounts array so we can test our game. 

Remember: Time travelling is only available when testing against Ganache, so some test need to be disabled when deploying on truffle.
There is another way to skip a test than putting an `x`:
```
it.skip("zombies should be able to attack another zombie", async () => {
    //We're skipping the body of the function for brevity
    })
```

